Echo Segmenter User Manual
Written by: Mary Kate Montgomery
Pfizer, Inc
March 2021
For questions regarding deployment, contact: Mary.Montgomery@pfizer.com. For questions regarding the segmentation tool itself, 
contact Chong.Duan@pfizer.com.

The Echo Segmenter is a python-based deep learning tool that deploys a U-Net to automatically segment the murine left ventricle 
in long-axis B-mode and M-mode echocardiography images based on prior segmentations.

--- Version History ---
8/24/20 – B-Mode version
3/8/21 - Full version with M-mode included

--- Preparing your data ---
The Echo Segmenter works on DICOM images (.dcm) which must be exported from either the Vevo3100, the Vevo2100, or the VevoLab 
Software as described below. (Note: the following screenshots were taken in the VevoLab Software. The scanner software may be 
slightly different.) 
1.	Under “Options”, set dicom naming structure. It is recommended to use a structure that puts the subject number at the beginning.
2.	Navigate to the study/series from which you want to export data
3.	Select scans to export by holding ‘Ctrl’ and clicking on the scans of interest
4.	Click the “Export” button at the top of the screen
5.	Select the folder in which to put the data. It is recommended to create a new folder to house the DICOMs for each run of 
        the Echo Segmenter, as the tool will operate on the entire contents of the folder.
6.	Change the settings on the right panel. Select “DICOM” from the list of export types, and then choose “Implicit VR Little 
        Endian” from the list of File Types. The software should auto-populate the “Save As” name with the format you set up in step 1. 
	Make sure the box labeled "Export regions" is checked.
7.	Click “OK” at the top of the screen

Once the DICOMs have finished exporting, the Echo Segmenter can be run on the folder holding the DICOMs. 


--- Installing the Tool ---
For help with installation, contact Mary.Montgomery@pfizer.com. The process is summarized briefly below:
1.	Install Anaconda. This can be done for all users on a computer if the installer has admin privileges. 
2.	For all users: Create environment for tool to use
    a.	Locate environment.yml file
    b.	Ensure file is in utf-8 encoding
    c.	Create environment with conda env create -f environment.yml
    d.	Activate with conda activate tf-latest
    e.	Upgrade or install any packages that were not able to be resolved during environment creation
3.	Copy files to accessible location (recommended: data (D:) drive):
    a.	Echo_Segmenter_UI.py
    b.	echoanalysis_main.py
    c.	util.py
    d.	util_nn.py
    e.	weights_ECHO_clean.h5
4.	Ensure working directory in Echo_Segmenter_UI.py is directing to proper local file location from step 3.

--- Using the Tool ---
To run the tool simply double click on Echo_Segmenter_UI.py. A shortcut can also be created and copied to the desktop for convenience. 
After double clicking, a black console window will open and shortly afterwards, the tool’s UI window will open.
 
Hit the “Select” button to open a file browser, then navigate to the directory in which the DICOM images to be analyzed are located. 
Hit “Select Folder” to tell the tool to analyze these images. 

Leave the “Save QC Results” box checked to save snapshot images of each scan’s segmentation results in the output directory. Uncheck the 
box to save only the Cardac Metrics Excel workbook, with the segmentation results for each scan.
Once all selections have been made, hit “Run” to start the program. The black console window will report its progress as the program 
runs, and a pop-up window will alert the user when the program has completed.

When run on a folder containing both m-mode and b-mode data, the tool will separate the files into 2 subfolders, called "M-Mode" and 
"B-Mode", and then segment the files in each of these folders using the appropriate model. When the tool is run on a directory containing
only m-mode or only b-mode files, it will run the appropriate model on that directory and will not move the files to a subfolder.
 
 

--- Saved Outputs ---
The results are saved in a directory called output_dir, located in the folder in which the Echo Segmenter is stored. The directory 
contains the following files:
1.	Output Excel workbook
    The .csv file, named output.csv, contains the systolic area, diastolic area, systolic volume, diastolic volume, and 
    Ejection Fraction calculations for b-mode scans, and systolic anterior wall thickness, diastolic anterior wall thickness, systolic 
    posterior wall thickness, diastolic posterior wall thickness, systolic interior diameter, diastolic interior diameter, fractional 
    shortening, LV Mass, and corrected LV Mass for m-mode scans.
2.	Output Images pdf
    The .pdf file contains representative segmentations overlaid on the images for QC purposes. All scans segmented in the folder are 
    included in the pdf.